# Bluemenstock Response 
Jasmin Martinez 

What is the promise of Data Science for Human Development? What are some of the pitfalls? 

International development has led to an increase in the use of big data to allow an increase in artificial intelligence and other ways that have positively impacted the developed world as well as the developing world. The use of this big data has a lot of promise but that promise seems to fall short when looking at the pitfalls that have been seen throughout the years and are still being seen today.  

There were many interesting promises that I found in the Blumenstock article which focused on data being used to match people living in regions of poverty to local resources, which has the potential to help many people find those resources in order to help them and their communities. Crop yields and childhood malnutrition could also be mapped and this could be a positive impact in helping to fight the next famine in the world. These were two positive examples given in the article but there were also negative examples that were presented. The use of big data to offer people digital loans was surprising to me. It seems efficient and like the ideal soultion in the fast paced world we live in but it also offers many pitfalls. This highlights the impact of unanticipated effects with the use of big data for international development. 

Digital loans may seem systematically good but when citizens do not know the underlying agreements to the loans then the unanticipated effects really begin to influence the promise. The article mentioned that “only 51% of borrowers in Rwanda were aware of the interest rate they were being charged.” The loan itself can offer temporary financial relief to those in developing countries which could lead to a positive national economic growth in the long term but it had a greater pitfall of contributing to the cycle of poverty and debt in the nation. Due to this we must also take into account who the real beneficiaries of international development through the use of big data are. 

The article started with examples of the use of big data for developing countries but as it continued it shed light on how the solutions being sought out where actually for the groups of individuals that were already in power. Creating an endless cycle to an unfortunate power dynamic around the world which allows the rich to get richer due to the lack of regulation that is present on private companies.  In both developed and developing nations private companies are at the head of these international developments through big data. And although the article did recognize that they are trying to help and do good in the world we must also take into consideration the words to Anna Raymond “good intent is not enough in data science when dealing with the problems which determine people’s experiences.” Once these companies begin to create international development through the use of  big data and help the people who are not in power and create experiences that will positively impact the human experience then the true promise of human development will be seen and met. 
